The Bay State Games are an Olympic-style athletic event for amateur athletes in the state of Massachusetts, which includes several divisions and allows athletes of all ages to compete. The Games are divided into Summer and Winter Games. The Summer Games include 25 sports and are usually held in late July. The Winter Games include three different sports and are usually held in late January or early February. The Bay State Games is a member of the National Congress of State Games.

Overview
The Massachusetts Amateur Sports Foundation (MASF), organizer of the Bay State Summer and Winter Games, provides Olympic-style athletic competitions and developmental programs for Massachusetts amateur athletes of all ages and abilities. The MASF operates statewide and year-round to promote personal development, education, physical fitness, teamwork, sportsmanship, and mutual respect. The MASF is a member of the National Congress of State Games, which comprises 42 states nationwide that conduct State Games events.

In 2009, the Bay State Summer Games celebrated its 28th anniversary, while the Bay State Winter Games enjoyed its 24th year. From a modest beginning of four sports and 300 athletes, the Games have grown to include almost 10,000 athletes in 28 different sports from more than 300 Massachusetts cities and towns. Each sport is organized according to national governing body rules. Age and skill divisions have been created to allow medal opportunities for a broad range of athletes.

The Bay State Games is the largest amateur multi-sports organization in the state of Massachusetts. This non-profit organization is a member of the National Congress of State Games, associated with the US Olympics and the multi-sport organization council. The Bay State Games’ mission is to promote personal development, education, health, physical fitness, teamwork and sportsmanship through recreational and educational programs. Over 30,000 Massachusetts residents ranging in age from 6 to 86 participate in these programs each year. The majority of athletes are from the middle school, high school, and college levels. The events by the Bay State Games generate an economic impact for the commonwealth of Massachusetts that is estimated at $3–4 million annually. Each year, the Bay State Games has over 1,500 volunteer including coaches, referees, and medical staff.

History
The Bay State Games was founded by Dave McGillvary in 1982.[1] McGillvary was on the Governor’s Council of Physical Fitness and Sports. He wanted to create a statewide summer sports festival for Massachusetts. McGillvary appointed Doug Arnot to pitch the idea of “Sportsfest” to the commonwealth of Massachusetts and to become the executive director. “Sportsfest” started off with only four sports with 500 athletes. The games were conducted on hardwood floors and playing fields at UMass Boston.

The Games’ breakthrough year came in 1985. Basketball became the Game’s showcase event in both women and men’s divisions. That same year, Arnot developed the idea of creating a winter sports festival for Massachusetts athletes. The Winter Games took place in the Northern Berkshire region because of the facilities available to them. Four hundred athletes took part in the 1985 Winter Games with competitions including figure skating, alpine skiing, cross country skiing and speed skating. Within the first couple of years with the Winter Games, there was much experimentation. Figure skating and alpine skiing were the only two sports which were included in every winter game. Masters ice hockey, youth ice hockey, speed skating, ski orienteering, snowboarding, sled dog racing, and cross country skiing were added into the competitions as the Winter Games became more successful.

Winter Games
The Winter Games are usually held in the month of February in the Northern Berkshire region of Massachusetts. Featured sports include figure skating, alpine skiing and ice hockey. Each year, the Winter Games have featured the Bay State Skate Figure Skating Show. This show was created in the 1980s to display some of the best skaters in the Winter Games. The Bay State Skate has more than a dozen Olympic skaters from the National and World Championships. Shows presented by the Bay State Games have included Olympians Nancy Kerrigan, Paul Wylie, Surya Bonaly, Linda Frattiani, Sylvia Fontana, and National competitors Mark Mitchell and Jennifer Kirk. The athletes in the Winter Games represent over 200 Massachusetts communities and participants range from ages 8 to 62.

Events

Alpine Skiing
Figure Skating
Ice hockey
Summer Games
The Summer Games is Massachusetts' own Olympic-style athletic competition that has been held since 1982 and features more than 7,000 athletes in 26 sports. Athletes represent over 300 Massachusetts communities, and participants range in age from 6 to 86. The Bay States Games reached it popularity in the 1990s when the number of participants increased to over 10,000 athletes. Over the years, the Bay State Games has expanded and focused more on individual sports such as swimming and track and field. The Bay State Games consists of competitions with archery, baseball, basketball, diving, fencing, field hockey, ice hockey, junior basketball, soccer, softball, tennis, volleyball, wrestling, 6v6 field hockey, and 7v7 soccer. Also, lacrosse has been one of the Games’ fastest growing sports. Master divisions were created and recreational sports such as baton twirling, judo, table tennis, and badminton. The Summer Games span is six to seven weeks in June and July. Tryouts for the Summer Games are held throughout the month of June, with finals taking place in the Metro-Boston and central Massachusetts area in mid-July.

Events

Archery
Badminton
Baseball
Basketball
Juniors Basketball
Baton Twirling
Candlepin bowling [1]
Diving
Fencing
Field Hockey
6 vs 6 Field Hockey
Ice hockey
Judo
Lacrosse
Pistol Shooting
Rifle Shooting
Rugby Union
Soccer
7 vs 7 Soccer
Softball
Swimming
Masters Swimming
Synchronized Swimming
Table Tennis
Tennis
Track & Field
Masters Track & Field
Trap Shooting
Volleyball
Wrestling
Programs
Verizon Future Leaders Scholarship Program
The Future Leaders Scholarship annually awards six $2,000 college scholarships to Bay State Summer and Winter Games participants. In partnership with Verizon, the MASF is proud to award these scholarships to student-athletes who demonstrate leadership through community service, academic excellence and athletic achievement. Since its inception, more than $200,000 has been awarded to students who have gone on to successful careers at prestigious institutions.

New Balance Sportsmanship Initiative
New Balance and the MASF are proud to do their part in promoting and recognizing acts of good sportsmanship. This program educates all Bay State Games participants on the elements of good sportsmanship, evaluates the level of sportsmanship exhibited by participants in Bay State Games events, and recognizes over 200 people each year who are strong role models for all athletes.

High School Spirit Program
Following the successful model established by other state games across the country, the Bay State Games launched the program in 2009 to help promote the Games and to reward Massachusetts' high school athletic departments for their participation in the Summer Games. Schools across the commonwealth are divided into three categories according to enrollment, and then more than $5,000 in grants are awarded to the top participating schools in those categories.

Kids Fitness Days
The Kids Fitness Challenge is a free, one-day program designed to motivate children to participate in physical activity, to educate them on the benefits of a healthy lifestyle and to foster a sense of school spirit. In addition to accomplishing these goals, $4,000 in cash grants is distributed annually to selected participating schools to enhance that institution's health and physical education programs. Since the program's inception in the fall of 2006, more than 25,000 students from across the commonwealth have participated each school year.

Sports Medicine Symposium
In conjunction with Boston Children’s Hospital Division of Sports Medicine, the MASF sponsors an annual sports medicine conference to educate athletic trainers and sports medicine professionals on current trends in the field. Participants earn continuing education units to maintain their certification.

Bay State Games Hall of Fame
The Bay State Games Hall of Fame recognizes athletes, volunteers, coaches, officials, organizers and commissioners who have had an extraordinary impact on the people and communities that are a part of the Games. Inductees include former Bay State Games athletes who competed in the Olympics, NBA, NHL, or MLB.

Class of 2008

Sarah Behn - Second leading scorer in Massachusetts Girls basketball history, All American at Boston College, Leading scorer in Big East Conference Women's Basketball history.
Mike Burns - College Soccer All American, Member of 1992 US Olympic Men's Soccer Team, Member of 1998 US World Cup Soccer Team, 7-year player for MLS Soccer
Joe Chirico - Diving Commissioner
Rachel Woo - Bay State Games Soccer Officials Coordinator
Class of 2007

Nancy Kerrigan - Participant in first BSG figure skating event in 1985. Two-time Olympian.
Dave Marcus - Table Tennis Commissioner.
Joe Cacciatore - Baseball Umpire Commissioner
Bruce McAndrews - Member of Winter Games organizing committee for over 20 years.
Class of 2006

Dana Barros - Two time BSG Basketball medalist. 13-year NBA veteran and NBA all-star.
Doug Arnot - Founded Bay State Games in 1982 and served as director for ten years.
Athletic Trainers of Massachusetts - Supported BSG since 1982 for medical coverage.
Rich Moran - 20-year Summer Games volunteer.
Class of 2005

Kelly Dostal - BSG Field Hockey athlete, 3 time NCAA champion and player of the year.
Jim Maher - Wrestling Commissioner
Louise Wing - 22-year Synchro Swimming athlete, National State Games Athlete of the Year.
Diane Wilcox - 24-year volunteer
Class of 2004

UMass Boston - Host of Summer Finals for 20 years
Jeanne King - 20-year volunteer from Verizon
Jim Pedro - Bay State Games Wrestling athlete, 4 time Olympian in *Judo
Class of 2003

Tom Lynch - Ice Hockey Officials Coordinator
Jim Underwood - Soccer Commissioner
Rebecca Lobo - Two time BSG Basketball medalist, Olympic medalist & NCAA Champion.
Class of 2002

Reggie Lewis - Two time BSG Basketball medalist, former member Boston Celtics.
Leda Levine - Field Hockey Commissioner
Barb Cece - Figure Skating Commissioner
Class of 2001

Charlie Butterfield - Track & Field Commissioner
Rob Garon - Swimming Commissioner
Melissa Mulloy-Mecozzi - Shooting Athlete, member Olympic shooting team
Notable Bay State Games alumni
Dana Barros
Bay State Summer Games Basketball Athlete
1989 to 2004 NBA Player
Sarah Behn
Bay State Summer Games Girls' Scholastic and Women's Open **Basketball
Athlete Big East Conference Women's All-Time Scoring Leader
Surya Bonaly
1999 Bay State Skate Figure Skating Show Performer
1992, 1994 and 1998 French Olympic Figure Skating Team Member
Michael Botticelli and Cheryl Franks
Bay State Skate Figure Skating Show Performers
1980 U.S. Pairs Figure Skating Olympic Team Members
Mike Burns
Bay State Summer Games Boys' Scholastic Soccer Athlete
1992 U.S. Olympic Soccer Team Member
1996-2002 MLS Player
Current Vice President of Player Personnel for New England Revolution
Kitty Carruthers and Peter Carruthers
Bay State Skate Figure Skating Show Performers
1980 and 1984 U.S. Pairs Figure Skating Olympic Team Members
Karen Cashmen
Bay State Winter Games Figure Skating Competitor
1994 U.S. Olympic Speed Skating Team Member
Jim Craig
Bay State Winter Games Masters Ice Hockey Athlete
1980 U.S. Olympic Ice Hockey Team Member
Bill Curley
Bay State Summer Games Boys' Scholastic and Men's Open Basketball Athlete
1994 to 1998 NBA Player
Calvin Davis
Bay State Summer Games Track & Field Competitor
1996 U.S. Olympic Track & Field Athlete
Greg Derr
Bay State Summer Games Shooting Competitor
1996 U.S. Olympic Shooting Team Member
Kelly Dostal
Bay State Summer Games Scholastic Field Hockey Athlete
Three-time All-American and National Champion at Wake Forest (2002–04)
Current UMass Field Hockey Assistant Coach
Philip Dulebohn and Tiffany Scott
Bay State Skate Figure Skating Show Performers
Bay State Winter Games Figure Skating Competitor (Scott)
2002 U.S. Pairs Figure Skating Olympic Team Members
Howard Eisley
Bay State Summer Games Men's Open Basketball Athlete
1994 to 2006 NBA Player
Scott Gregory and Suzanne Semanick
Bay State Skate Figure Skating Show Performers
Bay State Winter Games Figure Skating Athlete (Semanick)
1988 U.S. Ice Dancing Olympic Team Members
Bill Guerin
Bay State Summer Games Boys' Scholastic Ice Hockey Athlete
1998, 2002 and 2006 U.S. Ice Hockey Olympic Team Member
1991 to 2009 NHL Player
James Chico Hernandez
Bay State Summer Games Wrestling Competitor
Five-time U.S. Sambo National Team Member (2000–2005)
World Cup Sambo Vice-Champion (2000)
David Jensen
Bay State Winter Games Masters Ice Hockey Athlete
1984 U.S. Olympic Ice Hockey Team Member
Nancy Kerrigan
1985 Bay State Winter Games Figure Skating Competitor
1992 Bay State Skate Figure Skating Show Performer
1992 and 1994 U.S. Olympic Figure Skating Medalist
Reggie Lewis
1985 and 1986 Bay State Summer Games Men's Open Basketball Athlete
1987 to 1993 Boston Celtics NBA Player
Rebecca Lobo
Bay State Summer Games Girl's Scholastic Basketball Athlete
1996 U.S. Olympic Basketball Team Member
1997 to 2003 WNBA Player
Melissa Malloy
Bay State Summer Games Shooting Competitor
2000 U.S. Olympic Shooting Team Member
Kevin McGlinchy
Bay State Summer Games Baseball Athlete
1999 to 2000 Atlanta Braves MLB Player
Jim Pedro
Bay State Summer Games Wrestling Competitor
Four-time U.S. Olympic Judo Team Member (1992, 96, 2000, 04)
Two-time Olympic Silver Medalist (1996, 2004)
Stephen Scherer
Bay State Summer Games Shooting Competitor
2008 U.S. Olympic Shooting Team Member
Krista Schmidinger
1985 Bay State Winter Games Alpine Skiing Athlete
1992 and 1994 U.S. Alpine Skiing Olympic Team Member
Nikki Stone
Bay State Winter Games Alpine Skiing Competitor
1998 U.S. Olympic Aerial Skiing Team Member
Kara Wolters
Bay State Summer Games Girls' Scholastic Basketball Athlete
2000 U.S. Olympic Basketball Team Member
1999 to 2003 WNBA Player
Paul Wylie
1992 Bay State Skate Figure Skating Show Performer
1992 U.S. Olympic Figure Skating Silver Medalist
Alexander Chartrain
2009 Bay State Summer Games Track and Field Team Member
2010 Hollister Model Applicant
