A Bachelor of Technology (Latin Baccalaureus Technologiae, commonly abbreviated as B.Tech. or BTech; with honours as B.Tech. (Hons.)) is an undergraduate academic degree conferred after the completion of a three-year, a four-year or a five-year (such as in Nigeria) program of studies at an accredited university or accredited university-level institution. The degree is conferred in several countries, including the Commonwealth of Nations, Canada, Brazil, the United States and elsewhere.


Australia
In Australia, Bachelor of Technology (BTech) degree is offered by RMIT University, Edith Cowan University, Curtin University and certain private institutions.

These Australian degree programs focus on a blend of practices and theories based on modern and futuristic technologies.

Canada
In Canada, the Bachelor of Technology degree is offered by both universities and colleges after the completion of a four-year post-secondary program.

In some provinces, the degree may also be referred to as Bachelor of Applied Technology (BAT). Depending on the institution and location, different provinces hold different prerequisites and requirements for the degree. Majority of Canadian post-secondary institutions offer a blend of engineering theory and technological practice in the Bachelor of Technology degree.

India
In India, B.Tech. (Bachelor of Technology) and BE (Bachelor of Engineering) are the same and offered in engineering disciplines.

Bachelor of Technology or Bachelor of Engineering qualifications include the following:

3 years BE/B.Tech. after Diploma in Engineering
4 years BE/B.Tech. after class 12
Degree is regulated under the aegis of University Grants Commission of India (UGC), All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and National Board of Accreditation (NBA). Admission is through an engineering entrance examination.

Zimbabwe
In Zimbabwe, the B.Tech. and M.Tech. programmes are offered by Harare Institute of Technology (HIT) and carry the same weight with any other degree. BTech is commonly a 4 year programme with one year of industrial internship and a 4th year capstone design project. The MTech programme is a two year programme. The core of these degrees is the study and practical application of technologies in various fields of study.

Kenya
In Kenya, the B.Tech. is not a very common course. Technical University of Kenya (TU-K), located in the country's capital and Murang'a University of Technology (MUT) offer B.Tech. in Engineering and Information Technology. The duration of study is usually 4 years with 11 semesters in total, with two academic semesters per year and an industrial Based Learning (IDBL) semester from second year to fourth year.[1]

New Zealand
In New Zealand, Bachelor of Technology (Science) - BTech (Science) or Bachelor of Science (Technology) - BSc (Tech) is a 3-year program offered by Waikato Institute of Technology (Wintec) and University of Waikato respectively.

Nigeria
In Nigeria, the B.Tech. degree is awarded by the universities which can be federal, state or privately owned. The duration of study is usually four or five years. At inception, most of the universities offered core Science courses but have now expanded their course offerings to include Social Sciences and even Medicine.

Pakistan
In Pakistan, Bachelor of Technology - B.Tech. (old name) or Bachelor of Science in Technology/Engineering Technology - BSc/BS Technology/Engineering Technology (new name) is a four years undergraduate engineering technology degree in which first 3 years (six semesters) are study years and in the final or 4th year (7th and 8th semesters), students undergo a supervised industrial training. Degree holders are called engineering technologists. The accrediting body of engineering technology degree is National Technology Council (NTC) which is also responsible for registration of engineering technologists.

South Africa
In South Africa, the B.Tech. is awarded by Universities of Technology and Comprehensive Universities - as distinct from Traditional Universities - and is generally practice or career oriented, as opposed to academically oriented. It is often offered in areas in which there is no corresponding B.Sc. or BComm (e.g. B.Tech.: Forestry Management,[2] or B.Tech.: Explosives Management [3]).

The degree is obtained after 4 years of study and is usually offered as a 1-year program, following completion of a relevant three-year National Diploma.

The B.Tech. carries the same points as other bachelor's degrees in terms of South Africa's National Qualifications Framework (both having an NQF level of 7) At the same time, however, due to its orientation, it does not usually grant admission to the corresponding M.Sc. or MComm program,[4] and students instead pursue the Master of Technology (M.Tech.) and Doctor of Technology (D.Tech.) degrees; it does grant admission to MBA programs (see List of business schools in South Africa). In some cases, however, admission may be granted, once demonstrated that the student meets the necessary academic level to complete the requirements of the M.Sc or MComm.

Sri Lanka
In Sri Lanka, the Open University of Sri Lanka offers BTech (Hons) in engineering disciplines which has a duration of minimum four years. Undergraduates can be specialized in Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Communication Engineering, Computer Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Mechatronics Engineering and Textile and Clothing Engineering.[5]

University of Vocational Technology offers BTech in Multimedia and Web Technology, Network Technology, Software Technology, Construction Technology and Resource Management, Building Services Technology, Manufacturing Technology, Mechatronics Technology, Food Process Technology, Film and Television Production Technology, Media Arts Production Technology, Industrial Management Technology and Quantity Surveying.[6]

United States
In the United States, the Bachelor of Technology degree is awarded after completion of a 4-year academic program. The majority of the colleges and universities offering this degree are offered in the states of:

New York (New York City College of Technology, State University College at Buffalo, SUNY Morrisville, SUNY Cobleskill, SUNY College Of Technology At Alfred)[citation needed]
Missouri (Northwest Missouri State University)[citation needed]
South Carolina (Charleston Southern University[7])
Oklahoma (Rogers State University, Northeastern State University, Oklahoma State University[8]), Oklahoma State University Institute of Technology - Okmulgee,[9]
Georgia (Southern Polytechnic State University)[citation needed]
Washington (Lake Washington Institute of Technology)[citation needed].
